I saw a stipend with the department for a fellowship, and then she worked for Clark, and she made $250 a month.
I made $200 a month.
Where did y'all live in those days?
We lived in an apartment there behind the campus theater, about two blocks behind the campus theater.
It was $65 a month.
We had all the money we needed.
What did a young couple do for enjoyment?
Well, we didn't do a whole lot because I worked most day and night, but what we did do was we would go skiing, usually over Christmas break, something like that.
Other than that, the usual graduate student parties and things occasionally during the semester, but those were days of heavy, heavy work.
and those parties would have been held in somebody's apartment?
Yes, usually.
Sometimes departmental parties, parties for the graduate student.
Sometimes we'd go out on the river, cook out on the river.
But you pretty well made your own entertainment in those days.
There were the local beer halls and such, I guess.
I never did participate much in those.
When you came back as a young faculty member, where did you find a place to live?
We lived in a nice apartment complex, Redmond Terrace, where we lived until we bought a little home, which we did in, I guess we stayed in the apartment a couple years and then bought a house.
Did y'all think that there were any guidelines either spoken, written, or just simply understood of conduct for a young faculty couple?
I just understood the, certainly there were things like dress code.
I would certainly not be found this way on campus in those days.
So you wore, so you wore coat and tie?
Coat and tie.
And so did everybody else.
What about, what about parties, drinking, anything like that?
A few parties.
A young faculty member of the most of the departmental entertainment was by the department head.
Gil Ploss had become department head and was department head for nine years and he and
And Farah would organize three or four physics department parties throughout the year.
So the... And they would host them where?
At their home?
They would host the Christmas party at their home, and then the, there were picnic parties at the, in the park sometimes.
And I guess others at other people's homes.
I don't really recall.
I'm assuming I'm about to ask a very positive question.
What was, what impression did you and Carolyn have of the Places?
Oh, well they were just outstanding people.
And they, they'd have dinner parties and of course they were very nice but somewhat awkward.
Awkward?
Yes, it was sitting around the table with the plusses and the culture was a little deeper than my background had led me to, so I certainly feel a little out of water on some of these occasions.
But they're delightful people and thoroughly enjoyed our interactions with them over the years.
Were you aware early on of their deep interest in music?
Yes, yes.
Oh, yes.
And I love the, which you may remember, the letter to the editor in The Eagle, who is this woman who would dare criticize?
Were you here for that?
I think so.
And the Eagles editor responded to that question and listed Thyra's credentials that were truly outstanding.
What was Dr. Plass like as department chairman?
Just that.
He was a chairman.
A very, very pleasant man.
Very, very difficult for him to do anything that was difficult to do.
We had people who should have been fired.
We had people who should have been disciplined, and that just not was what he...
We had all kinds of things going on in those days that the fellow responsible should have been fired.
There was an incident of a rifle being taken and shot a hole through the military science window.
We had a staff person who, those were the early days of Auditrons for the Xerox machine.
He rewired one so he could use any Xerox machine on campus and not have to pay for it, and still Gill couldn't bring himself to fire the guy.
These were faculty members?
No, these were staff members.
Oh, staff members, staff members.
And he was department chairman from what?
Sixty-nine to sixty-eight to seventy-nine.
No, he was nine years.
Must have been 69 to 78 maybe, something like that.
The department was growing during that period.
Yes, yes.
He brought in a number of our people who are still here.
In fact, we'll be honoring one of them Friday morning.
Who's Ed?
Ed Fry.
F-R-Y-E?
No, F-R-Y.
F-R-Y.
See, I have to say some things about Ed Friday morning.
That's the reason I have his offer letter here because he has been an outstanding faculty member and this is a seminar in his honor.
And we have outstanding speakers coming from all over the world to honor him.
And so I'm going to start off by telling what his starting salary was and comment on what a bargain we got.
How was Dr. Plass identified?
What was the process that brought him here, do you know?
There was a committee.
A real search.
And I wasn't aware.
I was working too hard in those days to pay any attention to what
I was just trying to stay out of trouble because I was aligned with Squire.
Squire was the problem for the rest of the faculty, and I was just trying to survive.
And so I stayed in my lab, worked, and paid as little attention to the politics as I could.
And the first thing I knew that PLOS was coming was that Joe Hamm took me aside one time and told me that we had a new department head and that he would be arriving sometime sometime.
And so Gil showed up.
It was many, many years before it was Gil Plas.
It was Dr. Plas.
And if there was some dissension in the department when he arrived, he helped to subdue it?
Oh, yes.
Yes, yes.
No, things settled down, and there was dissension because of the way that
that Squire was running the department.
And Squire's first act as department has was to fire a faculty member.
And so there was a lot of resentment because of that, but there also was resentment for other things that he was doing heavy-handedly.
Dr. Plass was brought in because he had quite the opposite opinion of how things should run.
And so he came in as a department chair.
And the department operated in, best I could tell, a very fair fashion with everybody having their say.
And as far as I know, that was the first time the faculty ever had a committee that had input on the salary increases and that sort of thing.
Under Plass?
Under Plass.
There are a lot of faculty now who think that came in under a more recent department head, but I was on a committee that sat with PLOS and evaluated faculty for salary increases.
All right, in that process, what factors did that committee try to evaluate?
Well, that's been a humorous point for me over the years, too, because when I first came on the faculty, the physics, your physics was judged by the publication.
You published a lot of papers.
You were a good physicist.
Nobody paid much attention to the quality of the publication.
During Plas's regime, that shifted to citations.
And so it became very important during those nine years to have citations, because now you're not just counting papers, you're counting something that's more important.
You're counting citations to those papers.
Well, certainly not too long after PLOS's period,
The whole university went into accounting dollar mode, and that's the mode I think we're in now.
Doesn't matter what you do in physics, but if you're bringing in big bucks, you're gonna have the attention of the administration.
Doesn't matter that you never produce anything.
You're bringing in big dollars, so, and we have something like that.
What about teaching effort, ability, quality, was that?
The teaching over the years in physics, I think, has been quite good.
But no, but in that period?
Oh, during that period it was quite good.
No, but was it a factor in the?
Oh, in the evaluation?
Yes, I think so.
I think so.
But it certainly was a very small part of it.
It was commented on and it was some pressures to do a better job teaching.
I think it was after that time that we went to a teaching evaluation by the students.
I don't believe that started with PLOS, but it had been about that time.
Was there any effort to help new faculty members get started?
Was there any kind of advising system or?
Nothing formal.
There's still not much.
Certainly there there's help for, there was help then for young faculty getting started and financial support and some help writing proposals and usually a young person was brought in into a group where there were senior faculty members so there were there were informal help and but the
Over the years, the importance of the teaching, the classroom teaching end of it has become more and more important.
Dr. Zener was the first dean of science?
Yes.
And how did you evaluate him from the physics point of view?
He was sort of a strange person.
I never did feel that he had much control of the college, and it seems that he didn't have much control of the finances, and I think that he was removed because of finances.
Did y'all feel that physics was getting as much attention as it deserved?
Oh yeah.
Compared to the other departments?
We were with Zaner as dean and Squire as associate dean and there was lots of support.
But then we moved into Zaner gone and
Byers?
Well, Byers was an interim, because you probably know that story, but they tried to hire Mike Prescott as dean, and he refused it.
So we moved into Byers as interim dean, and then a year later, Prescott agreed to take it.
And Byers moved up to the vice president.
Well, he was still, he was vice president at the same time he was our dean.
Oh, that's right, that's right.
Yes, yes, yes.
He was just, he was doing both jobs.
And so then when Mac came in as the dean, I guess Byers was the vice president for a year or so, maybe longer.
Well, yeah, because before Byers we had
Vice President, Academic Vice President, Ralph.
Wasn't it Wayne Hall?
Yeah, that's who it was, Wayne Hall, yeah, Wayne Hall.
Under Prescott then, that was about the same time that Martell became very strong.
And so the resources from the college went heavily into chemistry and did for many, many years.
From a physics point of view, can you offer any description of Mac as the dean of science?
Yes, he was a good dean, I think.
He certainly was a dictatorial type dean.
He had great assistance from John Beckham.
Oh, describe John Beckham.
Oh, Superman.
John kept the place going.
He was the person most concerned with students and most concerned with doing what's right for the students, and yeah, John was a great one.
Mac Prescott was the dean
when I was the chairman of the search committee for the new physics department head.
And when we didn't find one then he asked me to be the interim department head and without telling me he was on his way to being vice president.
Maybe he didn't know, I don't know.
And so he went off to be vice president with Jarvis.
And then John Beckham was the interim dean while we waited for Tom Sugihara to come back off leave to become the real dean.
Now then the part of this story that not many people know is that Mack told me who was going to be the next dean the day that he told me that he was going to be the vice president.
That was Sugihara.
And then some month later or so, he formed a search committee and named George Catawar chairman of the search committee.
And poor George was running around here thinking he's doing something.
Still might, because they came up with three candidates.
One of them was Tom Sugahari, and so Mac went ahead and named Tom Sugahari, as he had always planned to do.
There is a story here that I will have a tough time ever forgiving Mac for, and that's this building.
We were located in a very, very nice building, as you well know, in a prime, prime part of campus, and I wanted to stay there.
And so I argued with Max that we needed to build a building in that parking lot 19.
And that would be our research tower.
We could then build a walkway from the tower to the old building.
We'd move into the tower.
remodel the old building, and then we would have a nice, beautiful complex for physics.
And we'd be where we had been since 1912, I believe, something like that.
And he said no.
Now why did he say no?
He said no because Tom Sugihara was a chemist, had a research lab in the cyclotron and he wanted a new office in the next building built for the College of Science and therefore he talked Mac Prescott into building this building here and physics would come here and it would have a dean of science complex and then Sugihara could be right next door to his damn research lab.
I probably shouldn't say that on the way.
And that infuriated me, that a decision like that would be made so that Sugihara could be there.
By the time we got the building, Sugihara was gone.
And John Fackler had no desire to move into
the dean's office over here, and so that idea got scrapped and there just was no excuse.
I also went to Prescott and I said, Mac, all right, you're going to force us to move over there, then surely you're going to build a building big enough that we can do our teaching in that building.
No, you're going to teach in Hildenfelsen.
So my faculty right now
have their offices here, and 90% of our teaching is done clear across campus in Heldenfeld.
This makes no sense.
Who inherited the old physics building?
That's when they twisted the blade, psychology.
Psychology.
And that, you all moved out of there about what year?
Oh, I guess we've been here 12 years, 13 maybe.
I've forgotten, but it must have been... Late 80s?
87, 88, 88 maybe.
88, I would guess.
Let's go back and pick up some senior administrators.
When you came back, Earl Rutter was the president.
What was the impression that you and your colleagues had of him as president?
Well, I can't say a whole lot about my colleagues, but I thought he was an outstanding president, and I have said ever since that time he was the only president we could have had at that time that would have gotten us where we were able to go, and that is non-compulsory core and co-ed.
I certainly agree with you, but what led you to those conclusions?
Because I know all my friends across this great state of Texas and their beliefs about this university being an all-male, all-military, and that was a strong feeling in those days.
And anybody else trying to make those decisions that General Rudder made would have been run out of town because he didn't understand Aggies.
He didn't understand this place.
He was anti-military.
Well, you couldn't make those charges against General Rudder.
So you had to accept what he was saying, because he was all military.
He was pro-Corp cadets.
He was pro, and yet he was carrying this university to non-compulsory corps and co-ed.
Now what most people don't know is this was not the first time this university had gone non-compulsory corps.
Because my sophomore year, this university changed.
I don't know anything about the history of all that.
But I know that 1954, entering freshmen did not have to join the Corps of Cadets.
And I had a number of friends who got out of the Corps of Cadets that year because it was not compulsory.
It was what, for two years?
I don't remember because it stayed that way until I graduated.
And I graduated in 57.
At least I think it stayed that way until I graduated because I was not aware if it changed back.
It was brief.
And then by the time I came back in 62, it was all, it was back to all military and non-Quaid.
How much did you, in those early years, how often did you see Earl Rudder?
Oh, yes.
How visible was he?
Oh, he was fairly visible out on campus.
I'd see him walking around campus.
I'd see him in the MSC.
I'd see him in the MSC coffee shop, and I distinctly remember one time walking in the aisle of that old coffee shop area, and he was right behind me and chatting, and yeah.
I think, and it certainly was my impression that he enjoyed being out on campus and talking to students, and so yeah, I'd see him around.
You were here when he died.
I was here when he died.
Were you aware that his health was declining?
No.
I certainly wasn't.
I heard stories afterwards.
Andy Suttle was.
Andy Suttle was aware that his health was declining.
I'm told by Charles Squire that there were trips to Houston where they would
where General Rudder would drive out to the city limits and pull off the side of the road and get in the back seat and tell Andy to drive to Houston.
Have you heard any of those stories?
Yeah, I've heard that, yeah.
Yeah, yeah, and that was because General Rudder was in bad health and didn't want anybody to know it.
And what, how did you hear that he had died?
Do you remember?
I don't remember any specific.
I, I, he was in the hospital for some time.
So I knew, somehow I knew that, that he was not doing well and then, then I suspect I heard it on the news or something.
Then Ludicke was the interim.
General Ludicke was the interim.
And then the next president, what was your impression of him?
The next president was Jack Williams, and I have on numerous occasions said to numerous people that Jack Williams was the best president this university has ever had or ever will have.
I'm on your side.
What caused you to feel that he was so capable?
Just watching him work, watching him operate.
One of my, really, really, you know, I ought to go see, maybe, I hope they exist somewhere, but I should have kept a copy of every letter he ever wrote.
I should have.
The man's correspondence was unbelievable.
I was just amazed by his letters.
And when I worked in his office, I'm sure you know this, but
I read every letter he ever wrote.
I'm sure there were a few exceptions.
But his policy was that every letter he wrote was circulated amongst the staff.
Every letter I wrote was circulated amongst the staff.
So every letter he wrote, I read, Nelda read, Bob Cherry read.
and then we'd pass them on.
They were carbon copies in those days and I'd get a file every morning that had his correspondence and I'd thumb through those letters and the intent's obvious.
He wanted everybody in his office to know what was going on.
How did you come to work in his office?
Describe how that came about.
I suspect you had something to do with it and I'm sure Ed Cooper had something to do with it because I'd known you two over the years.
I didn't know Dr. Williams from
I mean, he wouldn't know me from anybody.
In fact, I remember distinctly meeting him for the first time.
But I had, in 1970, Mac Prescott had asked me to come over as assistant to the dean.
So I was assistant to dean with Prescott for two years.
And then the first thing I knew was
I'd heard that Cooper was gonna go over and be deemed omissions and records, but I hadn't paid much attention to it or who was gonna replace him or anything.
And I was over having coffee in the MSC with Don Noggle and Roland Allen and minding our own business.
And I noticed there, Dr. Williams walked in and Cooper, and you may have been there, I don't remember.
And so I just noticed and I probably spoke to people there and then a couple of tables over.
And we went on talking around our table, and all of a sudden I look up, and there's Dr. Williams over my shoulder.
And he says, I'm Jack Williams.
And he introduced himself to the three of us.
And he said, Tom, could you call my secretary and make an appointment?
I'd like to talk to you.
I didn't know what was going on.
And so later, talking to Cooper, he says that he pointed to me and said that
Tom Adair, the one we've been telling you about.
What was that conversation with Dr. Williams like?
Describe it.
Do you remember?
Yeah, yeah.
When you went to the office.
Yes.
Well, first of all, you're impressed by this gigantic office filled with nicely polished wood and furniture.
So it was a gigantic office and beautiful conference table at one end.
And, of course, he was very pleasant.
And we chatted for a few minutes.
And then he said, well, you know, Ed Cooper's going to go over to this.
some people who recommended that you might be interested and so I want to talk to you and so you go back and see if you think about it and then let me know in a few days.
And I think he even went into what the salary would be and something about what he would expect and I'm sure he said, I don't remember, he said probably told me to get with Cooper and talk to him about what the job was all about and so
I did.
I came back and Prescott didn't know why he'd call me up there.
I'd told him before I went that I had to go up and see the president, so that made him curious.
But by the time I left to go up there, Prescott knew because as I was leaving, he said, well, yeah, I know you go up there and talk to him and think about it.
So I think he got on the phone to find out what's this young guy in my office going to go see the president about.
Those type things bothered him, not as badly as they did the latest dean I've had over here, but they bothered him.
And did, when you began, did Dr. Williams give you any rules, guidelines, advice?
Not really.
I went up, I had several weeks notice, and so I went up several times to visit with Cooper.
And the only time I remember of those visits is Dr. Williams had a buzzer he'd push when he wanted Cooper to come in.
And so I was sitting there chatting with Cooper one time and that buzzer.
And so Cooper said, come on, come on, we're going in.
So I wandered in with him.
We sat there and chatted with him.
And they were talking about a case, an incident at the library.
A what?
An incident at the library.
And evidently this co-ed was sitting there reading and it was these carols that you face this way and then there was a face this way but there were these walls you couldn't see.
And this somebody who was over there climbed under the desk in bitter tow.
And then ran.
And I'm sitting there listening to this conversation, wondering what I'm getting myself into.
But anyhow, those were very, very pleasant years.
And you were in the president's office how long?
Two and a half years, I guess.
I went up there September of 72, and I stepped down January of 75.
Okay, and describe the office staff and the other people and what their roles were.
I don't, there weren't very many.
Nelda Rao was certainly the chief assistant, though she'd probably called secretary in those days, but she was assistant to the president and all.
We have all ways of looking at it.
And then of course Bob Cherry and I were the only ones up there.
Describe Nelda and her, what she did and how she did it.
Nelda was amazing.
She's truly outstanding in running the office operation, and I was impressed by the whole operation.
Mostly I was impressed by the fact she would never give Dr. Williams anything unless she had a copy of it.
And I'm sure that was partly his request, because he lost a number of things, but she always had it.
But she was very efficient.
You couldn't ask for anybody better than Nelda to run that operation.
Bob Cherry, of course, was just floating here, floating there.
His responsibilities were the board.
But I didn't notice any real problems between the two, Dr. Williams and Bob Cherry.
As far as you recall, what was Bob Cherry's title?
What was his official?
Assistant to the President and Secretary to the Board of Regents.
They're Board of Directors, I think.
Of course, General Ludeke was there, too, while I was there.
And he was Executive Vice President, which was a thorn in Dr. Williams' side.
What did he, what were his, what was his role?
His role was construction.
Construction.
And you say that it was Thorne and Dr. Williams' side and in what way?
In that he didn't choose him to be that, in that position.
And I think that set the stage for their relationship.
Were there some times when they had disagreements?
No, no, I've never seen anything like that.
They probably did and might have, but my knowledge of it comes from Dr. Williams and he did
complained that the board made that appointment and that was a condition on his being hired as president, is that his executive vice president was named by the board, General Ludeke.
But I think General Ludeke oversaw a great deal of construction that was going on on campus in those days and really didn't get involved in any of the other aspects of the university.
Describe General Ludeke's personality.
Oh, I love the man.
I had many conversations with him.
My office and his office were pretty much side by side up there, so I
I really enjoyed visiting with him in those days.
Did he ever share with you any of his military experiences?
No, we never really, or if we did, I don't remember him, but I didn't really.
He always seemed to me to be very, very discreet about not passing.
No, he never talked about anything, the AEC, any of those days, I didn't.
And with those of us outside the office, Nelda was extremely discreet.